Courier Cost Analyzer

A Python-based web application for automated courier invoice
reconciliation, cost analysis, and predictive insights. The system helps
businesses compare courier company charges with internally calculated
expectations, identify discrepancies, and generate detailed analytics
reports with visualizations.

Overview

Courier Cost Analyzer automates the process of validating courier
invoices against expected costs. By uploading courier data files
(Excel/CSV), the system:

Merges multiple input files

Compares expected vs. billed courier charges

Highlights overcharging and undercharging cases

Generates summary tables and visual dashboards

Provides predictive insights using machine learning

This reduces manual effort, improves accuracy, and ensures transparency
in courier cost management.

System Architecture High-Level Components graph TD A\[Web Application\]
\--\> B\[Data Processing Engine\] A \--\> C\[Visualization Module\] A
\--\> D\[Prediction Engine\] E\[File Upload System\] \--\> B F\[Summary
& Reports\] \--\> C G\[Auth System\] \--\> A

Core Modules

File Upload System

Supports multiple Excel/CSV files

Handles preprocessing and cleaning

Merges datasets into a unified structure

Data Processing Engine

Standardizes columns and validates inputs

Performs reconciliation of expected vs. billed charges

Computes differences and applies business rules

Visualization Module

Displays detailed tables and dashboards

Generates zone-wise, weight-wise, and charge-based graphs

Supports per-file analysis and combined summaries

Prediction Engine

Uses pre-trained ML models (optional)

Predicts courier charge patterns and anomalies

Provides future cost insights

Authentication & User Management

Secure login system

Role-based access control

Personalized dashboard for each user

Input Data

The system accepts Excel/CSV files containing courier transaction
details.

Expected Columns (case-insensitive, auto-cleaned):

Order ID

AWB Number

Total weight as per X (KG)

Weight slab as per X (KG)

Total weight as per Courier Company (KG)

Weight slab charged by Courier Company (KG)

Delivery Zone as per X

Delivery Zone charged by Courier Company

Expected Charge as per X (Rs.)

Charges Billed by Courier Company (Rs.)

Output Data Output Data 1 -- Resultant Table

A merged dataset containing:

All original fields

Additional column: Difference Between Expected and Billed Charges (Rs.)

Output Data 2 -- Summary Table Category Count Amount (Rs.) Correctly
Charged Orders \<count\> \<total invoice amount\> Overcharged Orders
\<count\> \<total overcharged amount\> Undercharged Orders \<count\>
\<total undercharged amount\> Visualizations

File-wise order distribution

Zone-wise charge analysis

Overcharge vs. undercharge breakdown

Weight-slab based cost trends

Prediction Results

AI/ML-based cost insights

Forecasted charge trends

Anomaly detection (if enabled)

Project Structure . ├── config/ │ ├── config.py \# App settings │ └──
path_config.py \# File paths ├── src/ │ ├── data_processor.py \# File
reading, cleaning, merging │ ├── summarizer.py \# Summary table
generation │ ├── predictor.py \# ML model integration │ ├──
visualizer.py \# Chart/graph creation │ └── utils.py \# Helper functions
├── templates/ │ ├── dashboard.html \# Web dashboard │ └── login.html \#
Authentication page ├── static/ \# CSS/JS/Images ├── app.py \# Flask
application entry point ├── requirements.txt \# Dependencies └──
README.md \# Project documentation

Development Lifecycle 1. Setup and Installation \# Create virtual
environment python -m venv .venv

\# Activate environment \# On Windows .venv\\Scripts\\activate \# On
Mac/Linux source .venv/bin/activate

\# Install dependencies pip install -r requirements.txt

2\. Configuration

Add settings in .env file (if required):

SECRET_KEY=your_secret_key_here MODEL_PATH=models/courier_model.pkl

Verify column mappings in data_processor.py

3\. Development Workflow

Upload files → Validate → Merge

Run analysis → Generate summary → Save results

Visualize → Interactive charts on dashboard

Predict → ML model outputs future insights

4\. Maintenance

Monitor logs in /logs/

Update courier rate structures if needed

Re-train ML model periodically

Rotate secret keys and configs

Prerequisites

Python 3.12+

Flask framework

Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn

scikit-learn (for ML predictions)

Technical Requirements

OS: Windows/Linux/macOS

RAM: 4GB+ recommended

Storage: 500MB+ for logs & files

Browser: Chrome/Edge/Firefox

Network: Required for multi-user hosting

Error Handling

Input validation for missing columns

Graceful handling of invalid Excel/CSV files

Error messages for mismatched data types

Skip logic for unsupported files

Security Considerations

User authentication with hashed passwords

File upload sanitization

No sensitive data stored in logs

Secure session management

Performance Considerations

Supports multiple file uploads

Efficient merging using Pandas

Summary generation optimized for large datasets

Lazy rendering of graphs for performance

Future Enhancements

API endpoints for integration with ERP/CRM systems

Advanced anomaly detection using deep learning

Automated invoice PDF reconciliation

Multi-language dashboard support

Role-based analytics (Ops, Finance, Management)

License

This project is proprietary and confidential. All rights reserved.
